You're familiar with web services.
Well, APIs or application programming interfaces
and microservices are evolutions of them.
An API allows for data sharing between two different applications or systems,
which sounds a lot like a web service.
Well, what's the difference as both facilitate information sharing?
APIs are more dynamic.
Web services begin in the early 90's,
but the complexities with SOAP-based web services led to REST-based APIs,
which we will dig into more in the developing Restful APIs using Spring Boot section.
Now, SOAP stands for Simple Object Access Protocol,
and is a messaging protocol that uses XML to allow
applications running on different systems or platforms to communicate.
Now, API's are more lightweight and streamlined than a web service,
as web services typically carry more overhead to work with them.
APIs typically have a more lightweight architecture and are
good for devices with limited bandwidth like mobile devices.
Web services are often dependent on
the SOAP protocol to send and receive data over a network,
which is not a lightweight architecture.
When comparing web services to APIs,
the significance lies in the amount of work required by
consumers and providers to package and unpackage the data.
Think about it like this,
all skyscrapers are buildings,
but not all buildings are skyscrapers.
In a similar way,
all web services are APIs,
but not all APIs are web services.
Now, there's a new kid on the block called a microservice.
Microservices are similar to APIs,
but are fully contained individual components that communicate with each
other in calling clients and are modeled around a specific business domain.
For example, a restaurant may have
a microservice that serves as the single source of truth for location information.
Well, that location information is an individual component,
all the way down to the database layer.
Meaning the database only contains location data.
Services for menu items and orders are separate individual components.
Now, let's see a web service in action.